# Output

## Main output files

* `results/evidence/hints/merged.hints.gff`
  * extrinsic hints file from all evidences. It is always generated when you run the pipeline and its primary output.  
* `results/annotation/augustus/augustus.merged.out.gff`
  * output as generated by Augustus. It includes the annotated gene models, the extrinsic hints used, the protein sequences and the accuracy of each predicted model. 
* `results/annotation/augustus/augustus.proteins.fa`
  * protein sequences of the predicted models.  
* `results/annotation/evm/evm.annotation.gff` 
  * Refined gene models using EvidenceModeler (combining all inputs processed by ESGA)
* `results/annotation/evm/evm.annotations.proteins.fasta`
  * Proteins sequences from the EvidenceModeler gene build
* `results/annotation/pasa/pasa_DB_<assembly_name>.stripped.sqlite.assemblies.fasta.transdecoder.genome.gff3`
  * PASA gene building from assembled transcripts
* `results/annotation/pasa/pasa_DB_<assembly_name>.stripped.sqlite.assemblies.fasta.transdecoder.genome.proteins.fasta`
  * Protein sequences from the PASA gene build
  
## Additional directories
You can also see the output of each intermediate step, which is saved in specific folders inside the output directory. Of special interest are: 

* `results/augustus`
  * Results from the AUGUSTUS training
* `results/gmod`
  * WebApollo compliant GFF and wiggle files from various outputs of the pipeline
* `results/hints`
  * Hints files produced for AUGUSTUS from various evidence alignments
* `results/repeatmasking`
  * The repeat-mased genome and the repeat annotations in GFF format 
* `results/evidence`
  * results from the various pipeline inputs, mostly GFF alignment files. 
* `results/pipeline_info/` 
  * reports on pipeline performance. 
* `results/logs`
  * Various intermediate outputs
* `results/rnaseq`
  * Output from the short read alignments, including BAM files
* `results/transcripts/trinity`
  * Output from the Trinity de-novo assembly
