docs/troubleshooting.md, before:

# Genome Annotation - Troubleshooting

## General issues

### Genome assembly is highly fragmented

Your genome assembly should, at most, contain thousands of scaffolds - ideally much less than that. Modern sequencing approaches such as linked-read sequencing
or long reads make this a feasible goal for many organisms. It is also advisable to exclude very short scaffolds (<5kb) from your assembly prior to annotation;
usually these will not contain any useful information but can increase the run time dramatically.

### The annotation is missing many genes

ESGA is driven primarily by annotation hints/evidence, in part to ensure that not too many false positive predictions are produced. However, if the input evidence is incomplete or not quite fitting for the species to be annotated,
the resulting gene build will potentially be missing some models (or contain many errors). Another source of problems is the quality of the ab-initio profile used for gene finding with AUGUSTUS. If you organism is taxonomically distant to any of the available
prediction profiles, the resulting models will often not be of high quality. Consider using the built-in training routine to improve this.

### The annotation contains many false models

ESGA depends on a number of sources, including the ab-initio predictor AUGUSTUS. False predictions (let's call them false positives, FP) are a product of a number of factors, including but not limited to:

* lack of specificity of the chosen ab-initio profile
* noisy input data (especially RNAseq)
* inadequate repeat masking (some repeat types carry features that can be mistaken for, or are in fact, coding gene loci and seed incorrect predictions)

### Do I have enough/too much evidence data?

Another critical factor is of course the amount of sequence data that is used for annotation. Especially
the processing of RNA-seq reads can be very demanding on the compute infrastructure. So as a general recommendation, we suggest to work with "tens of
thousands of proteins", "hundreds of thousands of EST/Transcripts" and "tens of millions of RNA-seq reads".

### Deleting the pipeline work directory takes a very long time

This is a "known" issue with very deep directory trees under linux. The typical command `rm -Rf work` can then take hours, or days to complete.

As an alternative, try this:

```bash
mkdir -p empty_dir
rsync -a --delete empty_dir/ work/
rm -Rf empty_dir work
```

## Common causes for pipeline crashes

### SPALN protein alignments

Note: We have not encountered this issue in the past few releases of SPALN.

Spaln appears a little flakey in some situations. By default, spaln is run with the option "-Q7". You can modify this by using the --spaln_q option (or "spaln_q:" when using a yaml file) - try setting it to 6, or 5, and resume the pipeline run with "-resume".

Another source of problems is the underlying alignment/splice model. Make sure to set the option --spaln_taxon to something reasonable (see our [documentation](usage.md). By default, it is set to "Tetrapod", but if that does not make sense, use something more
fitting. When in doubt, use "unknown" and --resume the pipeline.

Finally, Spaln may behave oddly or fail catastrophically if the genome assembly contains problematic regions (illegal characters, for example). 

## RNA-seq

### Input files not found

If no file, only one input file , or only read one and not read two is picked up then something is wrong with your input file declaration

1. The path must be enclosed in quotes (`'` or `"`)
2. For RNAseq reads, the path must have at least one `*` wildcard character. This is even if you are only running one paired end sample.
3. When using the pipeline with paired end read data, the path must use `{1,2}` or `R{1,2}` notation to specify read pairs.
4.  If you are running Single end data make sure to specify `--singleEnd`

If the pipeline can't find your files then you will get the following error

```
ERROR ~ Cannot find any reads matching: *{1,2}.fastq.gz
```

Note that if your sample name is "messy" then you have to be very particular with your glob specification. A file name like `L1-1-D-2h_S1_L002_R1_001.fastq.gz` can be difficult enough for a human to read. Specifying `*{1,2}*.gz` wont work give you what you want Whilst `*{R1,R2}*.gz` will.

### RNA-seq consists of mixed library types - what to do?!

We found that, for novel genome projects, the generation of dedicated mRNA-seq data is generally recommended and a fairly typical step in the planning. However, 
you may be in a situation where you have to rely on "mixed" RNAseq data - say, stranded and unstranded reads, or paired versus single-end reads. Due to how ESGA is designed,
this is not easily supported. We want to make sure that the execution of the workflow is "mostly simple", but in order to accomodate a range of RNA-seq types, we'd have to force you to
use some sort of sample sheet to let the pipeline know about the various characteristics of your input data. For the time being, we have decided to not do that - but would consider adding something
like this later if there is demand for it. For now, this simply means that you won't be able to feed your "mixed" RNA-seq data into ESGA - but you could devise an assembly strategy with Trinity outside 
of our pipeline and feed the resulting FASTA file as EST (--transcripts) evidence. However, please note that Trinity too is not exactly designed to assembly mixed data like that - so you would likely have to run Trinity separately for differnt types of RNA-seq data and pass them as concatenated transcript hints (note: you'll have to rename the sequences since Trinity may create redundant names across multiple runs!). 

Another source of problems is the underlying alignment/splice model. Make sure to set the option --spaln_taxon to something reasonable (see our [documentation](usage.md). By default, it is set to "Tetrapod", but if that does not make sense, use something more fitting. When in doubt, use "unknown" and --resume the pipeline. 

## Extra resources and getting help

If you still have an issue with running the pipeline then feel free to contact us and open an issue here on github.

If you have problems that are related to Nextflow and not our pipeline then check out the [Nextflow gitter channel](https://gitter.im/nextflow-io/nextflow) or the [google group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/nextflow).

Commit message:

Cleaning up config and docs

docs/troubleshooting.md, after:

# Genome Annotation - Troubleshooting

## General issues

### Genome assembly is highly fragmented

Your genome assembly should, at most, contain thousands of scaffolds - ideally much less than that. Modern sequencing approaches such as linked-read sequencing
or long reads make this a feasible goal for many organisms. It is also advisable to exclude very short scaffolds (<5kb) from your assembly prior to annotation;
usually these will not contain any useful information but can increase the run time dramatically.

### The annotation is missing many genes

ESGA is driven primarily by annotation hints/evidence, in part to ensure that not too many false positive predictions are produced. However, if the input evidence is incomplete or not quite fitting for the species to be annotated,
the resulting gene build will potentially be missing some models (or contain many errors). Another source of problems is the quality of the ab-initio profile used for gene finding with AUGUSTUS. If you organism is taxonomically distant to any of the available
prediction profiles, the resulting models will often not be of high quality. Consider using the built-in training routine to improve this.

### The annotation contains many false models

ESGA depends on a number of sources, including the ab-initio predictor AUGUSTUS. False predictions (let's call them false positives, FP) are a product of a number of factors, including but not limited to:

* lack of specificity of the chosen ab-initio profile
* noisy input data (especially RNAseq)
* inadequate repeat masking (some repeat types carry features that can be mistaken for, or are in fact, coding gene loci and seed incorrect predictions)

### Do I have enough/too much evidence data?

Another critical factor is of course the amount of sequence data that is used for annotation. Especially
the processing of RNA-seq reads can be very demanding on the compute infrastructure. So as a general recommendation, we suggest to work with "tens of
thousands of proteins", "hundreds of thousands of EST/Transcripts" and "tens of millions of RNA-seq reads".

### Deleting the pipeline work directory takes a very long time

This is a "known" issue with very deep directory trees under linux. The typical command `rm -Rf work` can then take hours, or days to complete.

As an alternative, try this:

```bash
mkdir -p empty_dir
rsync -a --delete empty_dir/ work/
rm -Rf empty_dir work
```

## Common causes for pipeline crashes

### Running out of space in $HOME

Nextflow will download pipeline assets into a hidden directory $HOME/.nextflow. For this, you probably need a few hundred MB of free space. 

In addition, the containers used by ESGA will be build on-the-fly, which consumes space as well (dozens of GB!). On some systems, Singularity will use $HOME/.singularity for this - this 
is controlled by the Singularity config file, and can be manipulated by environment variables. If space does become an issue, consider re-directing the builds to a larger space. See the Singularity [documentation](https://sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/build_env.html) for more information. 

### File locking not supported

This issue will present itself immediately upon starting the pipeline. The underlying problem is that the database Nextflow uses for keeping track of the hundreds of jobs requires file locking support. Certain file systems, such as Lustre, do not support this. 

A possible solution involves launching the pipeline from a file system that supports locking (like a local disc, or NFS mount). This does not have to be shared across nodes - however, the "work" directory must be re-directed to a shared space:

```bash

cd /tmp
nextflow run ikmb/esga -params-file config-yaml -w /lustre/my_space/work 

```

More information can be found on the [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/cli.html) website. 

### SPALN protein alignments

Note: We have not encountered this issue in the past few releases of SPALN.

Spaln appears a little flakey in some situations. By default, spaln is run with the option "-Q7". You can modify this by using the --spaln_q option (or "spaln_q:" when using a yaml file) - try setting it to 6, or 5, and resume the pipeline run with "-resume".

Another source of problems is the underlying alignment/splice model. Make sure to set the option --spaln_taxon to something reasonable (see our [documentation](usage.md). By default, it is set to "Tetrapod", but if that does not make sense, use something more
fitting. When in doubt, use "unknown" and --resume the pipeline.

Finally, Spaln may behave oddly or fail catastrophically if the genome assembly contains problematic regions (illegal characters, for example). 

## RNA-seq

### Input files not found

If no file, only one input file , or only read one and not read two is picked up then something is wrong with your input file declaration

1. The path must be enclosed in quotes (`'` or `"`)
2. For RNAseq reads, the path must have at least one `*` wildcard character. This is even if you are only running one paired end sample.
3. When using the pipeline with paired end read data, the path must use `{1,2}` or `R{1,2}` notation to specify read pairs.
4.  If you are running Single end data make sure to specify `--singleEnd`

If the pipeline can't find your files then you will get the following error

```
ERROR ~ Cannot find any reads matching: *{1,2}.fastq.gz
```

Note that if your sample name is "messy" then you have to be very particular with your glob specification. A file name like `L1-1-D-2h_S1_L002_R1_001.fastq.gz` can be difficult enough for a human to read. Specifying `*{1,2}*.gz` wont work give you what you want Whilst `*{R1,R2}*.gz` will.

### RNA-seq consists of mixed library types - what to do?!

We found that, for novel genome projects, the generation of dedicated mRNA-seq data is generally recommended and a fairly typical step in the planning. However, 
you may be in a situation where you have to rely on "mixed" RNAseq data - say, stranded and unstranded reads, or paired versus single-end reads. Due to how ESGA is designed,
this is not easily supported. We want to make sure that the execution of the workflow is "mostly simple", but in order to accomodate a range of RNA-seq types, we'd have to force you to
use some sort of sample sheet to let the pipeline know about the various characteristics of your input data. For the time being, we have decided to not do that - but would consider adding something
like this later if there is demand for it. For now, this simply means that you won't be able to feed your "mixed" RNA-seq data into ESGA - but you could devise an assembly strategy with Trinity outside 
of our pipeline and feed the resulting FASTA file as EST (--transcripts) evidence. However, please note that Trinity too is not exactly designed to assembly mixed data like that - so you would likely have to run Trinity separately for differnt types of RNA-seq data and pass them as concatenated transcript hints (note: you'll have to rename the sequences since Trinity may create redundant names across multiple runs!). 

Another source of problems is the underlying alignment/splice model. Make sure to set the option --spaln_taxon to something reasonable (see our [documentation](usage.md). By default, it is set to "Tetrapod", but if that does not make sense, use something more fitting. When in doubt, use "unknown" and --resume the pipeline. 

## Extra resources and getting help

If you still have an issue with running the pipeline then feel free to contact us and open an issue here on github.

If you have problems that are related to Nextflow and not our pipeline then check out the [Nextflow gitter channel](https://gitter.im/nextflow-io/nextflow) or the [google group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/nextflow).
